---

layout: post
comments: true
title: "Handling Inputs in a Browser"

---

Interaction between the user and game elements are what make a game playable. Because we are using a web browser, we have only a couple of different input devices to worry about: keyboard, mouse, and on mobile devices a touch screen.

The nature of event handling in the browser makes implementing these three input devices relatively the same with minimal syntactic differences.

*Super Party Horse* only uses the keyboard to handle input as of writing. I'll use the keyboard as an example while talking about handling input events from the browser.

Bring on design paradigms!

Abstracting Concepts
--------------------

Before I get down and dirty talking about detecting events and handling them, I want to get a little abstract.

The questions that need answering regarding input are:

  1. How does the game detect when the user has pressed an input?
  2. How does the game respond to an input press?
  3. How do the previous two questions fit into the game engine?

These three questions are pretty basic but worth mentioning because when designing anything it's always useful to remember what problem is going to be solved.

I'll answer these three questions in the sections below as they apply to keyboard inputs.

Browser Events
--------------

First we need to find out how the browser detects inputs and somehow hook into that mechanism.

Turns out, the browser uses an *[Observer Design Pattern](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observer_pattern)* to drive events.

Simplified, an object can be *observable* (usually named an *emitter*) by other objects (named an *observer*).

When 'something interesting' happens, the emitter will *emit* that this 'interesting thing' happened to all of the *observers* listening to that emitter. This gives the *observers* the change to do something in response to this 'something interesting'.

In our case, the 'something interesting' is when a keyboard key is depressed.

It is beyond the scope of this article to know exactly how a web browser specifically drives events but [this MDN article](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/Events/Overview_of_Events_and_Handlers) is a good starting point if you're interested.

Now we just need to apply a listener for these events so we can specify what to do when a user depresses a key.

The specific event we are listening for is the 'keydown' event; fired whenever a user depresses any key on the keyboard. There are a bunch of browser events that you can hook into found [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Reference/Events). For now we are going to focus on one: 'keydown'.

Detecting Input
---------------

All we need to do to hook in to browser events is attach an event listener to the element that will have focus. In our case we want to listen to key events on the canvas element because that is the game window.

{% highlight javascript linenos %}

//add event listener to the DOM
document.addEventListener('keydown', function(ev) {

  //...handle the keydown
  ...

});
{% endhighlight %}

You might be thinking, "Why don't you add the event listener to the canvas itself?"

The answer is because the canvas isn't focusable by default.

There are two workarounds, one of them a hack:

  1. Set the tabindex property to 1 in the canvas element, forcing it to be focusable.
  2. Create your own 'focus' as described [in this StackOverflow post](http://stackoverflow.com/a/12886479).

Tricks aside, adding the event listener to the DOM, allows us to redefine all keys on the keyboard and makes the game less likely to miss an input if a user inadvertently clicks somewhere else on the page.

Also, since the only html element on the page at any time is going to be the canvas, adding the event listener to the DOM is fine.

Now that we know how to detect input let's cover how to handle that input.

Handling Input
--------------

The above code has an anonymous function declaration after the event name parameter.

This is the function to call when the event we are listening for is fired. Since this function is called *whenever* a key is pressed, we need a way of detecting *which* key is pressed and only handling those keys.

Let's extend the event listener code from before:

{% highlight javascript linenos %}

//add event listener to the DOM
document.addEventListener('keydown', function(ev) {

  //...handle the keydown
  console.log(ev.keyCode);

});
{% endhighlight %}

Line 5 just prints to the console the keyCode representing the key that was pressed. There are a whole bunch of properties the `ev` callback parameter contains but we are just concerned with the keyCode.

It follows that to handle any keyboard key, we just need to test for the corresponding keyCode:

{% highlight javascript %}
//key 'a'
if (ev.keyCode === 65) {
  //handle 'a' -- 'left'
  ..
}

//key 'd'
else if (ev.keyCode === 68){
  //handle 'd' -- 'right'
  ...
}

//key 'w'
else if (ev.keyCode === 87) {
  //handle 'w' -- 'up'
  ...
}

//key 's'
else if (ev.keyCode === 83) {
  //handle 's' -- 'down'
  ...
}
{% endhighlight %}

That's all for basic input handling, but this method isn't general enough to allow a game engine to define different functions to call when the same button is pressed.

Consider the case of wanting the 'spacebar' to mean *start the game* on one game screen and *attack* on another. Instead of hard coding another conditional inside of the keydown event function, we can encapsulate the entire method and store callbacks in an array. This way input callbacks can be dynamic depending on the situation.

Encapsulating Input
-------------------

This is the method used in the *ph-engine* and is the answer to question 3. It involves creating an 'InputManager' that listens to `keydown` and `keyup` events and calling the associated callback function.

First we define a data structure that represents one input:

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
//defines one input
var Input = function(name, keyCode, keydownCallback, keyupCallback) {

    //the name of this input; ex: 'left', 'right'...
    this.name = name;

    //the keyCode to listen for
    this.keyCode = keyCode;

    //what to do when this key is depressed
    this.keydownCallback = keydownCallback || function() { };

    //what to do when this key is released
    this.keyupCallback = keyupCallback || function() { };

}

{% endhighlight %}

`keyupCallback` is the function to be called when the key being pressed is released. The `keyup` event is the same idea as `keydown` but is fired when the key is released. We'll listen for those events too because they are useful for telling something to stop, or finish, if the activating key is no longer depressed.

Now that we have our data structure we need something to hold a bunch of *Input* objects. Sounds like an array to me!

` var inputs = [];`

Awesome! Next we define an initializing function that sets up an event listener for `keydown` and `keyup` events:

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
//sets up event listeners
function init() {

    //keydown
    document.addEventListener('keydown', function(ev) {

        //test for undefined
        if (inputs[ev.keyCode]) {

            //call callback
            inputs[ev.keyCode].keydownCallback();

        }
    });

    //keyup
    document.addEventListner('keyup', function(ev) {

        //tes for undefined
        if (inputs[evn.keyCode]) {

            //call callback
            inputs[ev.keyCode].keyupCallback();

        }
    });
}
{% endhighlight %}


*Woo! Mostly done.*

One thing to note: the `inputs` array is indexed by `keyCode`. Because we get direct access to the keyCode from the event object by `ev.keyCode`, it is much faster to index directly into the `inputs` array than to loop through the entire array and check if the current Input's keyCode matches the event keycode.

The last required function is designed to *add* an input to the underlying `inputs` array. By protecting the `inputs` array and making it a 'private' structure, we have easier error checking and are less prone to breaking the InputManager by trying to call an 'undefined' function.

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
//add new input
function addInput(name, keyCode, keydownCallback, keyupCallback) {

    //check for validity
    keydownCallback = keydownCallback || function() { };
    keyupCallback = keyupCallback || function() { };

    //create a new Input object
    var newInput = new Input(name, keyCode, keydownCallback, keyupCallback);

    //add new Input to collection
    inputs[keyCode] = newInput;
}
{% endhighlight %}

This function adds a new `Input` to the `inputs` array while handling undefined or unspecified callback functions. I check for validity of callbacks here AND in the `Input` constructor. Doing checking in both places isn't bad, but it is unnecessary. I only code both to exemplify the utility of wrapping the adding of a new input in a function.

Conclusion
----------

This ends the basic overview of input detection, handling, and fitting it into the engine. This idea is used in conjunction with [Game States]({% post_url 2014-02-25-game-states %}) to provide easy definitions of inputs across many different contexts.

The main questions to keep in mind while developing any input system are:

  - What is an efficient way of detecting input?
  - What is an efficient way of handling a detected input?
  - How can you keep the system general enough to be dynamic?

Hopefully I've provided at least a starting point for game input handling or any input handling whatsoever. 

Let me know what you think!

**Comment Storm!**
